Subscriptions
*************

The subscription of an instance of a container class will generally
select an element from the container. The subscription of a *generic
class* will generally return a GenericAlias object.

   subscription ::= primary "[" expression_list "]"

When an object is subscripted, the interpreter will evaluate the
primary and the expression list.

The primary must evaluate to an object that supports subscription. An
object may support subscription through defining one or both of
"__getitem__()" and "__class_getitem__()". When the primary is
subscripted, the evaluated result of the expression list will be
passed to one of these methods. For more details on when
"__class_getitem__" is called instead of "__getitem__", see
__class_getitem__ versus __getitem__.

If the expression list contains at least one comma, it will evaluate
to a "tuple" containing the items of the expression list. Otherwise,
the expression list will evaluate to the value of the list’s sole
member.

For built-in objects, there are two types of objects that support
subscription via "__getitem__()":

1. Mappings. If the primary is a *mapping*, the expression list must
   evaluate to an object whose value is one of the keys of the
   mapping, and the subscription selects the value in the mapping that
   corresponds to that key. An example of a builtin mapping class is
   the "dict" class.

2. Sequences. If the primary is a *sequence*, the expression list must
   evaluate to an "int" or a "slice" (as discussed in the following
   section). Examples of builtin sequence classes include the "str",
   "list" and "tuple" classes.

The formal syntax makes no special provision for negative indices in
*sequences*. However, built-in sequences all provide a "__getitem__()"
method that interprets negative indices by adding the length of the
sequence to the index so that, for example, "x[-1]" selects the last
item of "x". The resulting value must be a nonnegative integer less
than the number of items in the sequence, and the subscription selects
the item whose index is that value (counting from zero). Since the
support for negative indices and slicing occurs in the object’s
"__getitem__()" method, subclasses overriding this method will need to
explicitly add that support.

A "string" is a special kind of sequence whose items are *characters*.
A character is not a separate data type but a string of exactly one
character.

Related help topics: SEQUENCEMETHODS

